hey everybody it's saster I am super
excited today to have an incredible
guest Matt Mullen wig CEO and founder of
automatic WordPress we're going to learn
a little bit about the differences it's
is a classic old school OG open source
commercial open source everything leader
but I'm so excited obviously saster
would not exist without Matt and the
2,000 folks that work with him hard work
to build this we started saster in 2011
2012 with an idea to democratize the
learning of how to build B2B companies
and obviously needed a social platform
we grabbed WordPress and I don't know
how many thousands and tens of thousands
of Articles and pages and I could spend
our entire time nerding out on questions
I have about the software platform I
will in a bit but it's just it's one of
the things I'm in all day every day
including right now but Matt thank you
so much for joining and and coming back
to saster for this conversation that
it's my pleasure and it's a honor to be
here I really like the work youall do so
well before we get there you just hit 40
you said you've you've been doing but
but what's more interesting than that is
you've been doing this 20 years going
back to the very beginning of the first
code right 20 20 years any insights and
how to motivate yourself for half your
life to do one Mission oh wow I think
you just got to pick a big mission we
started in in 2003 to democratize
publishing yeah and so that was broad
enough that we've been able to at that
and and it's banned it and it's evolved
over time of course like what means to
publish has evolved over time but yeah
it's it's pretty exciting to have that
sort of north star that you can go
towards can you see yourself running it
at 60 gosh if I'm
lucky it's funny we're seeing so many
SASS and Cloud leaders reaching 20 years
at a billion in revenue and so many
milestones and it's interesting to watch
some folks have had the Baton on right
but it is interesting how many folks
we've decided we can just go so long
right this stuff can go almost forever
it seems I think that there's a lot that
you could build on and never
underestimate the power of compounding
yeah yeah that is the P right at all
levels product revenue and everything
right we got 10 years ago we didn't
fully get it we didn't fully get the
power of compounding right it almost
seemed like things were fatty one
platform would replace another overnight
but they don't do they they can
sometimes still technology is the
funnest Marketplace to work in the world
like people can switch very L but but
mostly there's compounding yeah
compounding all right so just to frame
the conversation I know you put this out
every year but how much of the web the
way you define it runs on WordPress the
platform how much of the web I think
we're right now around like 42% of web
42% 42% and you track that as notional
market share how do you think about that
metric yeah when we started tracking it
we were point8 oh really yeah so it's
good to have a number right and it's
been cool see that go up but it's really
a result of our work it's not our goal
right it's so if we are creating things
that are that serve our customers needs
that people want then more and more that
number will go up but the goal is not
really just the market share cool I want
to talk about the business and where
you're going but I wanted to take
advantage that I have you for a personal
question or two blogging because I've
been blogging for a while you've been
blogging for a while you've been
blogging you've had a birthday post for
20 years it's 43% of the web but is
blogging what it was how do you think
about what because I'm still all in on
blogging right I've got three blog three
pieces of content a day for 11 years but
is blogging on the decline how do you
think about that so blogging did decline
for a while yeah and why did it why
because distribution got really
fragmented spam websites got bad right
there were all these popups and there
were slow load and everything like that
we fixed all that so now it's cool to
see it coming back where people what
they want what a Blog what people loved
about a Blog was that person's voice yes
you know their story they like that the
authentic connection to someone like
yourself that has something some wisdom
they want to share a story they want to
tell that is timeless that will never go
out of style that will outlive both you
and me and so every single person has
like a birth right to have a place where
they could put their stuff that will be
there forever and that's what we to
create with WordPress and and it should
be fully open source and that's what we
do and that personal website the most
awkward part of this is the domain but
we try to make it easy on wordpress.com
to like get it all set it up and started
but I wish you'd bought Google domains
it would have made my life better I I
know you tried but we really think about
this long term one thing that we
launched last year was a 100-year plan
yeah so you could subscribe to a
100-year hosting plan wow um we are
thinking long term about these things uh
because we want you to have a place you
can put your stuff that you can enjoy it
it's out there it's part of contributing
to humanity yeah one um specific
question let's talk a little bit about
Ai and content obviously it's something
I'm sure you and your management team
are are talking about multiple times
every hour and every day right I'm a
little worried because of channels being
flooded with content and I'll give you
I'm I'm probably of the old OG saster
folks there's not many of us left on
Kora but I still read Kora I love Kora
because there's really some gems out
there sharing content in a niche way
that we don't on other medium so I love
it but if I don't know if you've been on
it lately I would say the majority of
answers and the majority of questions
are all AI driven they're AI prompt
driven and then AIS are answering all
these questions and so I see this future
where AI is corrupting the value of my
content and I'm I'm a little worried
when you think of what a AI is yeah it's
something that's learned from a bunch of
stuff it's trained on when you think of
what humans are yes we've learned from a
bunch of stuff we trained on and so each
human walking around is not an
artificial is is an intelligence and so
the product of that intelligence is so
valuable and so sacred yes and so I
think that they're very complimentary
and if the AI can help us find that
great let's what are you trained on so
there is a version of AI that the web
gets filled with Spam and you know
everything um think that will happen and
it doesn't matter because ultimately
what we're looking for is that
discernment that quality yeah because
what ultimately we'll be looking for is
that Insight that wisdom that thing and
a can help us find it yeah no for sure I
don't personally think it's going to
dest destroy high quality personally
created content I just think it can when
I take a saster question I put into chat
gbt I get an answer that is scrubbed
it's it's impersonal it's generic but it
sounds pretty good yeah when I ask it
how to hire a how to hire a sales team
or how to do these questions I get this
content that there's some hallucinations
and other issues but I I do worry
there'll be a hundred versions of some
of these these mostly right answers out
there but I guess the that stuff will
just shine through one way or the other
these are just tools we we need to use
to serve us better yeah okay so let's
talk a little bit about the company a
little bit so a little bit of framework
automatic WordPress what's the
relationship a little bit and then
what's the real business model today
what are how are how are you generating
revenue for the 2,000 folks yeah I'll
give like the tldr I founded co-founded
WordPress when I was 19 about a year
later I created a company called atic to
free Commercial Services around
WordPress so that was the goal from
almost day one was to commercialize it
in some fashion no not at all was like
never thought we'd make any money from
it so it really started as an open
source project right then thought it'd
be nice to get paid for working on this
fulltime so let me make some things that
could help do that the is its own thing
it's open source it's a amazing Vibrant
Community of at this point now hundreds
of thousands of people around the world
yes great add-ons plugins develop sites
everything it's like a really vibrant
ecosystem automatic is a member of that
ecosystem and we have some products
within the WordPress ecosystem like
wordpress.com where we can run WordPress
for you or a Kismet that can spam off
your site jetpack that makes your
WordPress better wo Commerce puts
e-commerce on your WordPress and we have
some stuff outside of that so we have
some separate apps one in the middle is
Tumblr y Tumblr is not running on
WordPress yet but it will so we're going
to switch Tumblr to be powered by
WordPress but then we have things like
cast so people might be listening to on
a podcasting app get P podcast it's the
very very best podcasting app what else
we have day one which is a journaling
app which is actually probably by the
time this is published on Monday to
launching a very exciting share journals
feature which would allow people to have
shared fully encrypted and synchronized
journals so like your family can have a
journal that never goes to the cloud
unencrypted that like never you're not
publishing it but like you can have for
your family like a beautiful place where
you share things that are like special
to you so excited about that and now
text so messaging is the so automatics
history like we started I I said 2005
publishing democratize publishing 2016
we went into Commerce with wo Commerce
let's democratize Commerce and we have
now an open source Shopify which is our
now our largest business it's uh growing
like a weed and and then in 2023 we
moved into messaging where we said hey
there's way too many messaging apps
right we have this tab of a babble
problem and let's make an app that
brings it all into one yeah and really
secure encrypted that we never see your
data it's all local to your device way
and that's text and that's a pretty
exciting strategy and now unfortunately
because I've been doing for so long I
got a lot of stuff to talk about so it's
complicated so automatic it's one of
those things if like it's a behind the
scenes brand we're like profor and
gamble or something we're not meant to
be a consumer Brands more automatic is a
brand of which I want you to think of
like open source and Excellence web
excellence and it's really just used for
fundraising and recruiting the most
talented people in the world but these
products that we create are part of a
shared philosophy which is around like
user control privacy data encryption
open source that like really puts power
back in the hands of the people and says
like technology should enable you it
should not be about like me or my
business model it should be about you
and what you want and that's where I
love technology there's a concept I
didn't really think about until recently
which is under a platform under
monetizing an opportunity because you
can what we've seen the last year and a
half especially with a lot of public
companies is they've over monetized it
We've ran through pricing increases
we've pressured folks to go to four-year
contracts from month to month but when
you have something that's beloved open
source or free or low end you could
almost under monetize it in a way like
you could say listen we could do ab we
given that we own 40 like I could come
up with an argument hey Matt look you
own 43% of the web you should be doing
43 billion in AR and it's one of those
tricky things is that the WordPress
ecosystem I would estimate to be about1
billion do per
year makes sense okay that ties to that
number yeah 10 billion but that is
across hundreds of companies right um
automatic is one of them
so we make a good amount it's not 10 to
12 billion but that means that when you
like rank these
companies we don't show up in the
Fortune 500 or anything like that right
because we're an ecosystem we're a
platform we're a movement we're we're
not just like a one entity so it it's
not great for leaderboards or anything
like that but I think it's good for
Humanity to have this type of approach
yeah I just think that sometimes it's
it's complicated where to draw the line
isn't it where to draw that line on
monetizing when you've got this broad
base I don't know the answers are always
obvious I I always go back to the
customer and where are they getting
value yes we do a lot of really hard
complicated things some which are
invisible to users some which are
visible yeah and I love business models
which are sub subscription models where
the user paying for something they get
value out of I don't love it where I'm
like I don't love advertising models or
other things where I'm like trying to
gather a lot of people and then sell
them to someone else we do that as well
we're business it's a good business
model for some of our things but what I
prefer and what I cherish is that direct
onetoone subscription that relationship
with a customer that sacred Act of them
taking out their credit card and saying
hey I value what you make and I'm going
to pay you for it
and what I want to build is a business
of as many of those subscribers as
possible so there's a 10 billion do
WordPress economy out there right
there's 10 billion most of your product
probably all of your product also
compete at some level right with some of
those Partners it's natural right
building a platform at this scale what
what have you learned from how do you
handle that coopertition or that piece
because you we all naturally want it
both ways we want a vibrate ecosystem
right and we want our own products to
win at the same time What If you learned
over the years it's that people don't
mind competition yeah but they need
transparency so yeah State your
intentions State your goals make it
clear and then we can navigate around
that actually we're doing a a big reor
in automatic right now I'm actually this
is news I'm for the first time in 18
years I'm taking a sabatical so
automatic the sabatical benefit where
every five years you get three months
pay time off and we architected in a way
where if you wait till seven years to
take it you don't get your next one till
12 so like it encourages you to take it
um although I created this benefit and
it's bound how awesome it is after 18
years I've never done
it so I'm the biggest hypocrite so
finally February take my first ever
sabatical and it's been a great sort of
forcing function for a lot of things uh
so so this has been a a great way to
summarize and and get everything lined
up one thing I identified in the company
that was not clear is that we have parts
of the company within the WordPress
ecosystem there are a web host people
that host your website and and there's
these plugins and add-ons and things and
so we develop the taxonomy where we said
at the company like those board games
that you would play like you get a card
at the beginning
you're not allowed to change your role
you get a card your card is either be
the host so you're trying to be the host
yeah or your card is help the host or
neutral you can't change cards so if
you're in a
division if you want to change cards you
need to change divisions so internally
we want to make it really clear to our
partners and everyone in the ecosystem
yes wordpress.com competes for hosting C
customers with every other WordPress
hosting in the world yes so that part of
the company that's the be the host part
the rest is a help the host so they
cannot preference part of the rules they
prence wordpress.com over any other host
in the world press.com gets access to
all the same code apis everything that
everyone else does got it they don't
even get Early Access no I guess there's
something same slack or P2 or something
there's but yeah basically like it's a
even playing field and so I want
everyone to be able to wake up in the
morning with a very clear intention and
goal and not having to like switch
between things through the course of and
it wasn't set up that way before then
before the reor it wasn't set up that
way part of what allow me to arrive this
Clarity was that personally I have been
running two of our businesses for the
past year and a half wordpress.com and
Tumblr normally we have leaders for
those but I filled in and it was very
hard for me to run
wordpress.com while also running
wordpress.org I didn't like it because
it's not that I don't like to have that
difference of goals yeah part of the
sabatical I've appointed a new leader
for wordpress.com they can just have one
goal got it now that is interesting so
the
wordpress.com they can support any
ecosystem of other apps of plugins of
e-commerce anything that makes that
group successful and then Woo which want
to talk about all the plugins all those
folks they can support the whole
ecosystem of hosts and that's their job
that's their job their own pnl their own
goals yes and they might be hosted by
blue host or ssy ground or GoDaddy or
anyone there's a lot of great people out
there yes so we want to partner with
them and make sure they have the best
experience possible because their
customer is our customer right one
tricky thing in our model because we're
not fully SAS right we're are
distributed software so the most
important thing in our in my world on
theor side is updates auto
updates right because software has bugs
so you want people to be on the latest
version if you break an auto update what
people logically do is they pin to an
old version right because they don't
break it and then what happens fast
forward two years I'm now comparing it's
2026 and I'm comparing a several year
old version of Wordpress
against a 2026 version of
Squarespace right that's not a good
comparison no I get I'm always reluctant
to tou I like saster I'm reluctant to
touch anything that's not broken right
so I want I got a lot of updates waiting
for me to to improve the code and make
present our best self to to people the
customers making a very logical decision
like what do I use to solve my problems
so yeah that's where we're at so let's
talk for a minute just on this and then
and then let's talk a little bit about
the future but woo and woo Commerce the
folks that that don't know haven't heard
about it or don't know much they might
not realize what a force it is in
e-commerce it's a force and I've lucky
enough to invest in a few leaders in B2B
e-commerce right and they are all
aligned on figuring out how they can do
the most with woocommerce right it has
become the number two platform I don't
know about rank maybe it's number one by
by users right but it's become a Force
right
so how do you how do you think about
that and how does that fit into a
Content company and how much or or a
platform company how much of your time
are you thinking about e-commerce and
what's the future there because it's a
big deal right as you alluded to I think
you said it's your biggest business now
right yeah and when we purchased
woocommerce in 2016 I said this will
become our biggest business oh you knew
it back then well it's obvious right
like I guess so because fundamentally
like
transactions that's the economy
right so like publishing is a good
business there's some value there but
transactions are everything else for
sure and messaging is my third leg
that's between those three I think you
cover like almost all of human activity
so if I can create really awesome open
source yes versions of those three
things I think we'll have a pretty good
world was it in 2016 I assume it was the
number one plug-in right is that why you
bought it it was number one or what was
it at the time so it was interesting
because it was a plugin for it was just
a plugin for word it just a plugin yeah
but there were companies like Magento
which were also open source that had
been bought by someone for like billions
of dollars wasn't one of the purchasers
yeah yeah and we were like and we were
just following the numbers we like hey
woo Commerce looks like it's has more
sites than Magento
has and it's a pluging and it's
complicated because honestly we looked
at it a few times it was created by a
theming company so a company that made
uh themes for WordPress designs for
WordPress their customers asked for
Commerce and so they made this and so to
be honest the code was not good and so
like the first couple times we looked at
it we decided not to buy it because the
code was so bad but at some point like
we're like they've really figured out
something with the users that's
resonating yeah so like we can fix the
code we're good Engineers so let's
they've done the hard thing which is
build something people want and so let's
buy that and then let's make the code
amazing and awesome yeah all right very
narrow I know we're talking about the
future and and decades but help us see
our crystal ball you were very lean for
many years barely raised any money and
then when times were good put a few
nickels in the bank did did some
secondaries and tender offers like we
all did so you do have to think about
public markets and windows and stuff are
things looking any better than a year
ago what are you thinking in terms of
public markets IPOs anything where's
your head at
what was this that I saw you probably
know the numbers like the number of IPOs
in like 22 versus 23 or something like
it's it's been rough right it's in B2B
after Hashi Corp there was only one IPO
which was clavo in e-commerce last year
it was two dry ears right but on the
other hand there's a lot of folks that
are doing well right they're at SC More
importantly they're at scale right
they're at 200 million or north of
Revenue right I gotta be honest I didn't
get here because of my knowledge of
financial markets so not my era of
expertise but no pre you're not feeling
any pressure or I will really focus in
on building going back how can we build
as many subscribers as possible how can
we build like a really robust
sustainable business with millions of
subscribers getting a lot of value from
what they uh do and then compound that
year over year for many decades to come
and also one big thing for me as a
fiduciary is I tell all my shareholders
like if you ever want to sell a share
I'm your man I don't know what the price
is but I don't want to lock them up so
got it automatic is a very closely held
stock it's basically our employees and a
few dozen of the most sophisticated
investors in the world so it's a very
small Market but it's a very coveted one
people really want though we are not
public there is I I feel very
comfortable that if anyone ever wants to
exit the business for whatever reason
they're no longer aligned with our
timelines or Mission or whatever my duty
to them as a shareholder is to find them
a great buyer and so I think by
facilitating that as actually just
saying that's my duty has really helped
a lot because no one feels like they're
locked up or trapped I don't want anyone
to feel trapped and at the end of the
day I am also a large shareholder of
automatic so I'm very aligned with all
these folks yeah yeah it is interesting
making that commitment as a founder and
you have to have automatic scale or
bigger for this to work but making the
commitment that you will find a
liquidity path it it it is relieving
because you don't have to take it at
least what there right I I suspect 5% of
the folks a lot of folks might want it
in stressful times but if it's there you
don't need you don't need the liquidity
as long as you know that that it's there
in theory in good product design you
don't come with a solution you come with
the problem right so don't it the
solution IPO you need IPO right come to
me with your problem yeah how old is
this fund are you locked up are you
trying to raise a new one do you need
social return do you want a dividend do
you want a like there's so many we can
be so creative in finding ways to solve
the problem and I think that's where you
find the ideal solution for everyone
versus like just saying hey and you must
IPO you must do this or that so there's
I would love for people in business to
just be more creative because there is
so much fun stuff you can do to solve
these problems it's a good point it is
what's the problem because people have
all different Horizons and goals here
right one siiz fitall is
suboptimal yeah okay last point before
we run out of time I want to make sure
we have enough time because this series
is what's new what are the one or two
things that you're most excited about
that are coming out or coming down the
pike the next I'll call it 15 months
because you're a sabatical the next 15
months you know what I I will highlight
again those three apps day one
pocketcast and yes text
as really exciting solutions that maybe
people hav't tried out before and check
it out pocketcast is open source by the
way so Matt this was great maybe one I
since I have you one last question since
we got your the the future products you
have also been living in a distributed
team world since before almost any of us
right almost from day one been
distributed I feel like we're in a new
world where we all were forced to be
distributed and now we're in a new world
any as you go off on sabatical and all
this any new learnings on how to instead
of instead of specific companies like
automatic being distributed with all of
us any learnings on how to reboot our
teams reboot motivations reboot ways cuz
I see honestly a lot of struggle out
there for non-developers non folks
working in this world I don't think we
figured it all out totally yeah we were
the pioneers of distributed and fully
remote from day one and everything but
what a lot of people maybe because that
was the story that was the interesting
part
they missed the part that we invested a
ton in meeting up those meetups yeah we
lost that during Co just like everyone
else did by the way our culture
suffered like we were not as productive
during Co people thought oh this must be
I had other CEOs this must be great you
just you're you must be running at full
speed I'm like no I hired 1,00 people
the past year that have not past two
years they have not met each other
they're not working together very well
the hot mess
so it was not good we have been meeting
up like maniacs since since been safe to
do and a lot of if you look at the
WordPress side a lot of our community
building is also around events it's
monthly meetups and cities all over the
world it's word camps I'm going to be at
word Camp Asia March 7th to 9th and then
word Camp Europe I go to all these
different work camps all over the world
that convening there's just something
there which is worth investing it's pain
in the butt to travel and get a dog
sitter cat sitter whatever it's
worthwhile have a culture which is the
remote thing isn't working one identify
that talk about what's not working and
see how you can bring people together
and then when you go back apart you'll
be way more effective yeah is it
quarterly is that the Cadence you guys
have have have aligned on or is there a
specific Cadence I think it varies so
much for every team so a fun thing I'll
tell you is that we used to do Grand
meup where we brought the whole company
together but our last one was in 2019
but now we've decided that every five
years we will do a whole company Meetup
and so we're going to do the first one
in
2025 and the next one in 2030 so like
it's expensive it's like a whole thing
but like it's that feels like the right
Cadence so I think it's just look at the
problem look at what benefits you want
out of it and then decide what could be
a good Cadence that works well yall if
you were starting up like a small team
10 people
gosh get together as as frequently is
reasonable for your your respective
situations yeah it's a good reminder I
do think folks have cut Corners there
whether it's because things are tougher
or times and we're not investing enough
and getting our distributed teams
together right I think we're all
suffering for it but it's not daily it's
not weekly those are not too much and so
it's probably closer a monthly quarterly
is uh a real sweet spot for this Matt
this was great thank you for investing
so much time I'm excited for your three
months off I'm excited to see you come
back even fresher with new Innovations
for the community including us I hope
you don't check your phone more than
three times a
day and thanks for everything man this
was great appreciate it